It's again been over a year since my last progress report. I've mostly been
working on figuring out the content of the YM2413 instrument ROM. For most
instruments I've found settings that are close (sometimes very close) to the
built-in instruments, but never 100% identical. I suspect there are still some
details wrong in the model that I'm using. I will (slowly) continue working on
this.

But this slow progress is sometimes discouraging. So for some more variety I
started to look at the YM2413 rhythm sounds. This is still very early work, but
I already found something interesting. (Spoiler: strictly speaking it's nothing
new, software YM2413 emulators already got this right, but it's nice to have it
confirmed anyway).



1) Rhythm sound measurements.

So far all my measurements on the real YM2413 captured (only) the output of
channel 0, outputted on the 'MO' analog output pin. But the rhythm sounds are
outputted on various other channel numbers (thus at different relative moments
in time) and on the 'RO' analog output pin.

To be able to measure rhythm sounds I had to make (small) adjustments to the
embedded software on the capturing board. Short summary: before the board
itself located channel 0 (in time), only sampled that channel and send it back
(over USB) to the host. Now I added a mode where the board samples 72x faster,
thus capturing all channel information (both MO and RO pins). And then the host
software must post-process this data to isolate the channel(s) it's interested
in.

Anyway, I was making some initial captures of the 5 rhythm sounds. And by
mistake I captured the 'snare drum' sound with a frequency setting of 0x0
instead of the recommended value of 0x550 (I forgot to update my program to
write the frequency settings to registers 0x17 and 0x27 instead of registers
0x16 and 0x26). This gave the following result:

  [image: sd-freq0.png]

Notice that the envelope is visible, but all samples have the same sign. If we
zoom in on the tail, where the envelope is fairly flat, we see this:

  [image: noise.png]

From what we've reverse-engineered so far this is an unexpected result: if the
frequency is zero, the phase should remain constant. But in this result the
phase is clearly toggling between two values.



2) Noise generator.

Compared to the melodic channels, the rhythm channels use one extra component
for sound generation, namely a random noise generator. Might the above signal
be the output of the noise generator?

Looking more closely at (120) consecutive samples in this signal gives the
following. I mapped sample value 255 to '0' and all other values to '1':

          1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0,
          0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1,
          0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1,
          0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0,
          1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1,
          1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0,
          0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1,
          1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1,
          1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1,
          0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1,
          0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1,
          1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1,

This looks pretty random to me. A very common choice for a random generator is
a Linear Feedback Shift Register (LFSR). It's cheap to implement in hardware
and it has various nice mathematical properties. It's also used is several
other sound chips from the same time period (e.g. AY8910 and SN76489). So it's
likely that the YM2413 (and other chips in the Yamaha family) use it as well.

But how can we know for sure? The Berlekamp-Massey algorithm can help us here.
For a given sequence of 0's and 1's, the BM-algorithm constructs the cheapest
LFSR that fully reproduces that sequence.

    [url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berlekamp%E2%80%93Massey_algorithm]

If I feed the above sequence of 120 bits into the BM-algorithm I get the
following polynomial as result:

    x^23 + x^9 + x^8 + x + 1

I'll explain what this means in the next section. If you're interested, you can
check my implementation of BM plus some more analysis code here:

    [code: lfsr.cc]

If I sample the noise signal at other time offsets and apply BM, I each time
get the same result. Or if I take only the 60 first samples of the above
sequence, BM still gives the same result. Moreover the resulting LFSR can then
correctly predict the continuation (the last 60 samples) of that sequence.

I repeated this experiment on several different captures and several different
sample sequences, and I always get the same result. Of course given that the
input sequence is long enough (usually 30-40 samples is sufficient). This is a
strong indication that the YM2413 indeed uses a LFSR for it's noise generator,
and specifically the LFSR with this polynomial.



3) Linear Feedback Shift Register (LFSR)

But what is a LFSR exactly? You can find many details and references on
wikipedia. But below I'll also try to explain in an easier (less precise) way.

    [url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear-feedback_shift_register]

Very brief the idea is the following:
 - Remember the last N output bits.
 - Pick a (fixed) selection from those bits (e.g. always pick the 5th- and
   6th-to-last output bit).
 - XOR the selected bits. The result is the new (pseudo-random) output bit.

This is illustrated in the following image:

    [image: lfsr.png]

For now only look at the 'Fibonacci-configuration'. You see a large rectangle
that contains 23 smaller cells. Each of these cells stores one bit. These
contain the last 23 output bits of the LFSR. Some of these outputs (bits 1, 8,
9 and 23 in this example) are XOR'ed together and the result is feed back to
cell 1. This is the newly generated random bit. When a new output bit is
generated, all existing bits shift one position to the right. So the last bit
becomes the 2nd-to last and so on.

Notice how the 'tap-positions' (1, 8, 9, 23) correspond to the exponents in the
polynomial that describes this LFSR (x^23 + x^9 + x^8 + x^1 + 1). There's a
mathematical reason why polynomials are used to describe LFSRs, but I won't go
into that. The '+ 1' at the end of the polynomial does not correspond to a
tap-position, it makes sense in the mathematical description (it's related to
the input), but we'll also ignore that here.

This was the 'Fibonacci-configuration' of a LFSR. This description is easy to
understand, but it's usually not how LFSRs are actually implemented. In
practice, both in hardware and in software, often the 'Galois-configuration' is
used instead. This configuration is shown in the lower part of the image.

Both configurations have the same number of shift register bits and the same
number of XOR operations. Only the arrangement differs. (Also note that the
numbering is swapped left-to-right). In the Galois configuration the XOR
operations are located 'in between' the shift register bits. Thus the shifted
bits get modified while they are 'in-flight'. It can mathematically be shown
that both configurations produce the exact same output sequence (in cell '1').
But the full internal state (including the values of the other bits in the
shift register) is NOT the same for both.

Some mathematical properties:
- When all bits in the shift register have value '0', the newly calculated
  value will also be '0', thus the LFSR remains stuck in this state forever.
- This specific LFSR (23,9,8,1) has 'maximal length'. This means that, when
  iterating this LFSR, every state (except for the all-0 state) is visited
  exactly once before we return to the start-state. In this case we have 23
  bits of state, so the random sequence will repeat itself after 2^23-1 =
  8388607 steps.

Applied to the YM2413 this means that:
- The hardware must make sure that after a reset the shift register does not
  contain all '0' bits. Any other state is fine. So e.g. it's fine to set one
  specific bit to '1' and leave all others uninitialized. Or initializing all
  bits to '1' is fine as well of course. I don't know how the real YM2413
  initializes the LFSR state.
- The random sequence repeats itself after about 8.3 million steps. Given the
  YM2413 sample rate, that's over 160 seconds. That's more than sufficient.

I mentioned that 'Galois' is more often used than 'Fibonacci'. Why is that?
- Mathematically both are equivalent. So purely from a mathematical point of
  view neither is better than the other.
- In hardware there's a difference in propagation delay:
  - Fibonacci: to calculate the new output bit the signal has to propagate
    through 3 XOR ports.
  - Galois: the calculation for each bit passes through at most 1 XOR port.
  So in theory a Galois LFSR circuit can be clocked higher compared to the
  corresponding Fibonacci circuit. (Though I don't believe the LFSR is a
  bottleneck in the full YM2413 circuit).
- In software there's a more substantial difference. The Galois variant can
  exploit word-level parallelism and therefor typically requires less CPU
  operations compared to the Fibonacci variant.

    // Input: LFSR state.
    // Output: updated LFSR state, random output is located in bit 0.

    unsigned lfsr_step_fibonacci(unsigned state) {
        bool output = ((state >> 22) ^ (state >> 8) ^ (state >> 7) ^ state) & 1;
        return (state << 1) | output;
    }

    unsigned lfsr_step_galois(unsigned state) {
        bool output = state & 1;
        state >>= 1;
        if (output) state ^= 0x400181
        return state;
    }



4) Comparison to existing hardware/software.

Let's check how the noise function is implemented in the existing YM2413
software emulators. In the openMSX src/sound/YM2413Burczynski.cc code you can
find this code snippet:

    if (noise_rng & 1) noise_rng ^= 0x800302;
    noise_rng >>= 1;

That's equivalent to the 'lfsr_step_galois()' function above (difference is
whether the XOR operation is applied before or after the shift operation). So
the software emulation was already using the correct LFSR. It's always nice to
confirm such things.


Can we also find this LFSR in the YM2413 die-shot? I already speculated about
this in an earlier article. Here's a (slightly extended) repetition of the
YM2413 die-shot.

    [image: die-shot.jpg]

In the upper-right corner, near the green colored 'PG' rectangle I marked in
white a shift-register with 14 (or 15?) bits. That's not enough for the full
LFSR (needs 23 bits) but it might correspond to the longest chunk of 14-bits in
the Galois-configuration of the LFSR (see above). The single bit registers
surrounded by XOR gates are hard to see in this die shot (at least for me). And
the remaining 7 bit shift register might be obscured by all the wiring in this
region. Also important: placing the LFSR close to the other circuitry that
handles phase calculations is very logical. All this gives me more confidence
that this white colored shift register is indeed related to the noise
generation.



5) Next steps

I'll probably continue with investigating the rhythm sounds. This article only
looked at the noise generator, but we still need to figure out how exactly this
noise is used to produce the rhythm sounds. After that I'll probably return to
the instrument ROM. As always, help would be appreciated.
